docs/environment_upgrades.md, before:

# Upgrades (Toolkit, Environment)

- [GitLab Environment Toolkit - Quick Start Guide](environment_quick_start_guide.md)
- [GitLab Environment Toolkit - Preparing the environment](environment_prep.md)
- [GitLab Environment Toolkit - Provisioning the environment with Terraform](environment_provision.md)
- [GitLab Environment Toolkit - Configuring the environment with Ansible](environment_configure.md)
- [GitLab Environment Toolkit - Advanced - Custom Config / Tasks / Files, Data Disks, Advanced Search and more](environment_advanced.md)
- [GitLab Environment Toolkit - Advanced - Cloud Native Hybrid](environment_advanced_hybrid.md)
- [GitLab Environment Toolkit - Advanced - Component Cloud Services / Custom (Load Balancers, PostgreSQL, Redis)](environment_advanced_services.md)
- [GitLab Environment Toolkit - Advanced - SSL](environment_advanced_ssl.md)
- [GitLab Environment Toolkit - Advanced - Network Setup](environment_advanced_network.md)
- [GitLab Environment Toolkit - Advanced - Geo](environment_advanced_geo.md)
- [GitLab Environment Toolkit - Advanced - Monitoring](environment_advanced_monitoring.md)
- [**GitLab Environment Toolkit - Upgrades (Toolkit, Environment)**](environment_upgrades.md)
- [GitLab Environment Toolkit - Legacy Setups](environment_legacy.md)
- [GitLab Environment Toolkit - Considerations After Deployment - Backups, Security](environment_post_considerations.md)
- [GitLab Environment Toolkit - Troubleshooting](environment_troubleshooting.md)

When discussing upgrades there's not only the Environment to consider but also the Toolkit itself.

On this page we'll detail how both work. **It's worth noting this guide is supplementary to the rest of the docs, and it will assume this throughout.**

[[_TOC_]]

## Toolkit Upgrades

Before running any upgrades for your environment we recommend using the latest version of the Toolkit. This will ensure that the latest GitLab config is used when updating and will avoid any issues.

When updating the Toolkit, we recommend checking the [Toolkit's release notes](https://gitlab.com/gitlab-org/gitlab-environment-toolkit/-/releases) for any called out breaking or config changes to ensure no issues occur on upgrade.

In addition to the above please be aware of the following guidance also:

### Perform Terraform Dry Runs for new Toolkit versions

Where possible we **strongly** recommend that you do Terraform dry runs whenever you have updated the Toolkit to ensure no significant unintended actions occur.

This is done simply by running `terraform plan`.

Once completed the output will show what actions are to be performed. If any actions are listed to be performed, especially destroy actions, we recommend checking these against the [release notes](https://gitlab.com/gitlab-org/gitlab-environment-toolkit/-/releases) where these should be called out to ensure they are intended. If any of the actions look suspect please reach out to us via the [issue tracker](https://gitlab.com/gitlab-org/gitlab-environment-toolkit/-/issues) or via the standard [support channels](https://about.gitlab.com/support/).

This is recommended as certain infrastructure changes can trigger large destroy actions that in turn can lead to the loss of the environment and data. While this is behaviour from the cloud providers, every effort is made with the Toolkit to ensure this is avoided but since the consequences can be significant it's always best to do the dry run as described above out an abundance of caution.

In addition to this we'll endeavour to call out any config options that if changed could also lead to the above.

### Avoid automated Toolkit updates and Terraform Auto Approve together

With the above considerations it's worth calling out specifically that you should avoid automated Toolkit updates along with using the Terraform `--auto-approve` behaviour together. This option, available with various Terraform commands such as `terraform apply`, instructs Terraform to make all changes without confirmation.

This recommendation is especially so with Production instances. If you're using the Toolkit with non production instances where a risk of data loss is acceptable then the above combination may be desirable.

## Environment Upgrades

The Toolkit fully supports handling GitLab upgrades for your environment - with both [standard](https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/update/with_downtime.html) and [Zero Downtime upgrades](https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/update/zero_downtime.html) supported.

By design the Toolkit will perform upgrades much in the same way as the first build - any _provisioning_ changes are handled by Terraform and _configuration_ changes handled by Ansible.

Typically, this should be seamless and running the same commands just as you did in the main runs should only be required to perform any GitLab upgrades but be aware of the guidance below as applicable.

### Follow GitLab Upgrade Paths

The Toolkit by default will always attempt to install the latest GitLab version unless [configured differently](environment_configure.md#gitlab-version).

However, the [standard GitLab Upgrade rules still apply](https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/update/#upgrade-paths) when upgrading across multiple GitLab versions. You should refer to the docs to ensure the intended upgrade can be performed directly or if you need to upgrade to a certain version first.

### Zero Downtime Updates

For Zero Downtime Updates, the toolkit follows the [GitLab documented process](https://docs.gitlab.com/omnibus/update/README.html#zero-downtime-updates) and as such the documentation should be read and understood before proceeding with an update.

:information_source:&nbsp; As with any update process there may rarely be times when a few requests fail when the update is in progress. For example, when updating a primary node it can take up to a few seconds for a new leader to be elected.

:information_source:&nbsp; Note that Zero Downtime Updates are **not available** for Cloud Native Hybrid environments as they aren't supported in the [GitLab Charts](https://docs.gitlab.com/charts/installation/upgrade.html).

Running the zero downtime update process with GET is done in the same way as building the initial environment but with a different playbook instead:

1. `cd` to the `ansible/` directory if not already there.
1. Run `ansible-playbook` with the intended environment's inventory against the `zero-downtime-update.yml` playbook

    `ansible-playbook -i environments/10k/inventory playbooks/zero_downtime_update.yml`

1. If GET is managing your Praefect Postgres instance you will need to run the following command to update this

    `ansible-playbook -i environments/10k/inventory playbooks/praefect_postgres.yml`

:information_source:&nbsp; This will cause downtime due to GET only using a single Praefect Postgres node.
  If you want to have a highly available setup, Praefect requires a third-party PostgreSQL database and will need to be updated manually.

The update process can take a couple of hours to complete, and the full runtime will depend on the number of nodes in the deployment.

## OS Upgrades

OS version upgrades should be handled directly and follow the standard process for each OS. Refer to the OS's docs for more info.

The Toolkit can't handle OS upgrades for you as they typically involve inputs and require restarts.

:warning:&nbsp; On Cloud Providers, changing the machine image in Terraform **must be avoided** as this is treated as the base disk and will trigger a full rebuild and lead to data loss.

Commit message:

Use Internal load balancer to find Patroni leader

docs/environment_upgrades.md, after:

# Upgrades (Toolkit, Environment)

- [GitLab Environment Toolkit - Quick Start Guide](environment_quick_start_guide.md)
- [GitLab Environment Toolkit - Preparing the environment](environment_prep.md)
- [GitLab Environment Toolkit - Provisioning the environment with Terraform](environment_provision.md)
- [GitLab Environment Toolkit - Configuring the environment with Ansible](environment_configure.md)
- [GitLab Environment Toolkit - Advanced - Custom Config / Tasks / Files, Data Disks, Advanced Search and more](environment_advanced.md)
- [GitLab Environment Toolkit - Advanced - Cloud Native Hybrid](environment_advanced_hybrid.md)
- [GitLab Environment Toolkit - Advanced - Component Cloud Services / Custom (Load Balancers, PostgreSQL, Redis)](environment_advanced_services.md)
- [GitLab Environment Toolkit - Advanced - SSL](environment_advanced_ssl.md)
- [GitLab Environment Toolkit - Advanced - Network Setup](environment_advanced_network.md)
- [GitLab Environment Toolkit - Advanced - Geo](environment_advanced_geo.md)
- [GitLab Environment Toolkit - Advanced - Monitoring](environment_advanced_monitoring.md)
- [**GitLab Environment Toolkit - Upgrades (Toolkit, Environment)**](environment_upgrades.md)
- [GitLab Environment Toolkit - Legacy Setups](environment_legacy.md)
- [GitLab Environment Toolkit - Considerations After Deployment - Backups, Security](environment_post_considerations.md)
- [GitLab Environment Toolkit - Troubleshooting](environment_troubleshooting.md)

When discussing upgrades there's not only the Environment to consider but also the Toolkit itself.

On this page we'll detail how both work. **It's worth noting this guide is supplementary to the rest of the docs, and it will assume this throughout.**

[[_TOC_]]

## Toolkit Upgrades

Before running any upgrades for your environment we recommend using the latest version of the Toolkit. This will ensure that the latest GitLab config is used when updating and will avoid any issues.

When updating the Toolkit, we recommend checking the [Toolkit's release notes](https://gitlab.com/gitlab-org/gitlab-environment-toolkit/-/releases) for any called out breaking or config changes to ensure no issues occur on upgrade.

In addition to the above please be aware of the following guidance also:

### Perform Terraform Dry Runs for new Toolkit versions

Where possible we **strongly** recommend that you do Terraform dry runs whenever you have updated the Toolkit to ensure no significant unintended actions occur.

This is done simply by running `terraform plan`.

Once completed the output will show what actions are to be performed. If any actions are listed to be performed, especially destroy actions, we recommend checking these against the [release notes](https://gitlab.com/gitlab-org/gitlab-environment-toolkit/-/releases) where these should be called out to ensure they are intended. If any of the actions look suspect please reach out to us via the [issue tracker](https://gitlab.com/gitlab-org/gitlab-environment-toolkit/-/issues) or via the standard [support channels](https://about.gitlab.com/support/).

This is recommended as certain infrastructure changes can trigger large destroy actions that in turn can lead to the loss of the environment and data. While this is behaviour from the cloud providers, every effort is made with the Toolkit to ensure this is avoided but since the consequences can be significant it's always best to do the dry run as described above out an abundance of caution.

In addition to this we'll endeavour to call out any config options that if changed could also lead to the above.

### Avoid automated Toolkit updates and Terraform Auto Approve together

With the above considerations it's worth calling out specifically that you should avoid automated Toolkit updates along with using the Terraform `--auto-approve` behaviour together. This option, available with various Terraform commands such as `terraform apply`, instructs Terraform to make all changes without confirmation.

This recommendation is especially so with Production instances. If you're using the Toolkit with non production instances where a risk of data loss is acceptable then the above combination may be desirable.

## Environment Upgrades

The Toolkit fully supports handling GitLab upgrades for your environment - with both [standard](https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/update/with_downtime.html) and [Zero Downtime upgrades](https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/update/zero_downtime.html) supported.

By design the Toolkit will perform upgrades much in the same way as the first build - any _provisioning_ changes are handled by Terraform and _configuration_ changes handled by Ansible.

Typically, this should be seamless and running the same commands just as you did in the main runs should only be required to perform any GitLab upgrades but be aware of the guidance below as applicable.

### Follow GitLab Upgrade Paths

The Toolkit by default will always attempt to install the latest GitLab version unless [configured differently](environment_configure.md#gitlab-version).

However, the [standard GitLab Upgrade rules still apply](https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/update/#upgrade-paths) when upgrading across multiple GitLab versions. You should refer to the docs to ensure the intended upgrade can be performed directly or if you need to upgrade to a certain version first.

### Zero Downtime Updates

For Zero Downtime Updates, the toolkit follows the [GitLab documented process](https://docs.gitlab.com/omnibus/update/README.html#zero-downtime-updates) and as such the documentation should be read and understood before proceeding with an update.

:information_source:&nbsp; As with any update process there may rarely be times when a few requests fail when the update is in progress. For example, when updating a primary node it can take up to a few seconds for a new leader to be elected.

:information_source:&nbsp; Note that Zero Downtime Updates are **not available** for Cloud Native Hybrid environments as they aren't supported in the [GitLab Charts](https://docs.gitlab.com/charts/installation/upgrade.html).

Running the zero downtime update process with the Toolkit is done in the same way as building the initial environment but with a different playbook instead:

1. `cd` to the `ansible/` directory if not already there.
1. Run `ansible-playbook` with the intended environment's inventory against the `zero-downtime-update.yml` playbook

    `ansible-playbook -i environments/10k/inventory playbooks/zero_downtime_update.yml`

1. If you have a Praefect Postgres instance deployed via the Toolkit, you will need to run the following command to update it:

    `ansible-playbook -i environments/10k/inventory playbooks/praefect_postgres.yml`

1. If you have HAProxy load balancers deployed via the Toolkit, you will need to run the following command to update them:

    `ansible-playbook -i environments/10k/inventory playbooks/haproxy.yml`

:information_source:&nbsp; Updating either Praefect Postgres or the load balancers in this way will cause downtime. This is due to GET only using a single Praefect Postgres node and the load balancers being a single point of entry to the site. If you want to have a highly available setup, Praefect requires a third-party PostgreSQL database and will need to be updated manually.

The update process can take a couple of hours to complete, and the full runtime will depend on the number of nodes in the deployment.

## OS Upgrades

OS version upgrades should be handled directly and follow the standard process for each OS. Refer to the OS's docs for more info.

The Toolkit can't handle OS upgrades for you as they typically involve inputs and require restarts.

:warning:&nbsp; On Cloud Providers, changing the machine image in Terraform **must be avoided** as this is treated as the base disk and will trigger a full rebuild and lead to data loss.
